♪
(narrator)
Our planet is
the greatest living puzzle
in the universe,
a collection of worlds
within worlds,
each one a network
of relationships and connections
between
all their living parts,
leading to the diverse
and complex world we live in.
And at the heart
of many of these worlds
is a very special group
of animals--
the insects,
and their close relatives,
the arachnids
and crustaceans,
classed together
as the arthropods.
Together they account
for 80% of all animal species
on our planet.
In these three specials,
we're going to explore
the connections
and relationships
that they have with us,
our planet,
and with each other,
ultimately to understand
how this group
hold the key to life itself
inside "Nature's Microworlds."
Arthropods are
the most abundant
and diverse group
of animals in the world.
They inhabit every continent
and every ocean...
from the harsh climate
of Antarctica
to the driest of deserts
around the equator,
from the lushest jungles
to the highest mountain peaks.
There are an estimated
10 million species,
more than all the other
animal groups combined.
But what is the secret
of their success?
What is the single key
to their global domination?
To understand this,
we need to unpick one by one
the factors that influence
the lives of arthropods.
First we need to understand
what arthropods are
and where they came from.
And to do that, we must travel
to Delaware Bay
on the East Coast of America.
Four hundred million
years ago,
the first land animals pulled
themselves out of the sea.
They were the ancestors
of the arthropods
who dominate
our planet today.
And each spring
on the highest tides
of the full and new moons,
a similar spectacle
still occurs.
These are horseshoe crabs,
some of the most primitive
arthropods alive today.
They're here to breed.
The males are two-thirds
the size of their mates
and cluster along
the water's edge
as the females arrive.
Clinging to the female's shell,
he's pulled up the beach,
fertilizing her eggs
as she lays.
For these crabs, breeding
on land is only possible
because
of the arthropod blueprint.
[zapping]
Their basic body plan
is the same as all arthropods--
a hard exoskeleton,
segmented body,
and jointed legs,
a body plan
that's persisted unchanged
for 400 million years;
a body plan as adaptable
as it is simple.
The key design feature
is no doubt the exoskeleton.
A hard external skeleton,
largely made of chitin,
that provides protection,
support for muscles,
but most importantly,
prevents water loss
from the body.
The ability of the exoskeleton
to retain water
is the factor
that allows these crabs
to lay their eggs on land
and ultimately
allowed arthropods
to be the first animals
to colonize the land.
But even this master
of design, the exoskeleton,
has a weakness.
How do you grow
inside a suit of armor?
To see that, we must travel
400 miles south
to a freshwater microworld
in South Carolina.
This crayfish is getting ready
to transform,
something all arthropods
must do to increase their size.
In preparation, he withdraws
calcium from his shell
and stores it
in little white tablets
on the side of his head.
His hard exoskeleton
then splits
and the larger,
soft-bodied crayfish emerges.
It can take up to a few days
for the new exoskeleton
to fully harden,
and before this occurs,
the crayfish is vulnerable.
This queen snake is
on a hunt for a meal.
The hardened armor
of the crayfish
is too much for her,
but she can detect
the chemicals given off
by the soft body
of a freshly molted crayfish
and knows this is her chance.
As soft as a doughnut,
this crayfish
provides a hearty meal.
So the exoskeleton,
vital to their success,
also leaves them vulnerable.
And it has another
significant defining effect
on all arthropods--
it restricts their size.
This is the largest
terrestrial arthropod,
the coconut crab.
This crab will molt each year
and can live until he's 60,
yet is still no larger
than a newborn baby.
If you must transform
every time you need to grow,
then there's a limit
to how big you can get.
But this apparent
size disadvantage
can be seen as an asset.
It opens up a whole new world
for the arthropods.
And to see how,
we must travel
to the Flow Country
in Scotland.
This is the fairy wasp,
a quarter
of a millimeter long.
They spend nearly
all their lives underwater.
She is one of the smallest
known arthropods
alive on the planet and almost
invisible to the naked eye.
She makes a tiny water flea
look like a giant.
This female is looking
for a very specific place
to lay her eggs.
She positions
her microscopic ovipositor
to pierce into the stem
of a plant
where the eggs of a water beetle
have been laid.
She deposits up to 100 eggs
inside a single beetle egg.
When the young hatch,
they have a ready source
of food--
the water beetle's
undeveloped young.
It's only the size
of this wasp
that opens up this niche
for her to exploit.
In fact, the arthropods'
diminutive size
gives them a real trump card
in the game of life.
It allows them to exploit
microhabitats,
be it an egg,
a gall on an oak tree,
or a single leaf.
The wealth of habitats
and niches available to them
is virtually infinite.
But being small
also makes them vulnerable.
Their size and abundance
makes them an ideal food source
for a whole host
of other animals...
including the biggest animal
to have ever lived...
the blue whale.
So if size is not
the ultimate key
to their success,
we must look elsewhere
and examine why the diversity
of arthropods
has evolved so much faster
than in all other animal groups.
How do the arthropods
speed up their evolution?
To find out, we must travel
to a microworld
in our very own back gardens.
This is a female
cabbage aphid.
In spring she produces
100 offspring in just a week.
Her offspring already
have babies inside them,
so this mother aphid
is nurturing her granddaughters
even before they're born.
If all her descendants
survived and bred,
by the end of the summer
there'd be
1,560 billion trillion aphids.
She is the ultimate
breeding machine.
This ability to reproduce
prolifically
is a real trait
of the arthropods.
Having lots of offspring
and a quick lifecycle
increases the chances
of genetic mutations occurring.
And it's these mutations,
however bizarre they seem,
that increase the diversity
of the gene pool.
They can provide
novel solutions
to life's challenges...
and ultimately lead to
the evolution of new species.
This means that arthropods
have the ability
to respond to opportunities
and potentially fill niches
faster than any other group
of animals.
This does gives them
a winning hand
and provides another
vital piece in our jigsaw.
But it's not the whole story.
We've seen how arthropods
have been around
for over 400 million years,
how their winning body plan
has stood them in good stead
for all this time.
We've seen how their size
enables them
to exploit microhabitats,
and rapid reproduction has
accelerated their evolution--
all factors
that have enabled them to fly,
squelch, crawl, and scuttle
into the myriad of forms
we see today.
But there's a twist
in the tale.
For the real key to their
global success and diversity,
we must look
much closer to home.
To really understand
the diversity of the arthropods,
we must examine how
the presence
of other arthropods
affects them.
Firstly, let's look
at what can be achieved
when arthropods
work together.
[buzzing]
This colony of 40,000 bees
is focused on a single task--
the production of honey.
They have a single queen
who is the only bee to lay eggs.
She can lay up to 2,000
in a single day.
Each bee is roughly
1.5 centimeters in length.
Their exoskeleton prevents them
from growing any further
in this adult form.
But there's an animal
over a million times its weight
on the prowl,
and he's after their honey.
To lose their honey now
would be fatal
for their colony.
It'll be their only source
of food
during the cold winter months.
But this super society
won't give up its hard-won prize
without a fight.
They attack
and sting en masse.
The first stinger
releases an alarm pheromone
that tells other bees
to join in.
The stings are barbed
and hook into the skin
of the bear.
Each sting has its own
nervous system
and pumps venom
into the attacker.
Worker bees
can only sting once
and then they die.
It's the ultimate sacrifice
for their colony.
But the bees are victorious.
The bear is repelled.
Teamwork enables these bees
to defend their precious honey
against an intruder
many thousands of times
their own size.
So working together can offer
great advantages for defense.
But it's one thing
if your attacker
is an animal
like a black bear
and quite another
if it's the environment itself.
So how does working as a team
allow you to live
in one of the toughest
environments in the world?
To find out,
we must travel 9,000 miles
to the mangroves
of Australia.
They may look like
a benign place to live,
but they're actually packed
with potentially deadly
natural forces--
hot tropical sun, salty water,
and the risk of drowning
with every high tide.
But in the mangrove mud
is where these ants have chosen
to build their nest.
And teamwork has turned
the tide to their advantage.
Each high tide brings
a fresh bounty of food
that the ants can harvest.
But this tide also brings
the threat of drowning
and the precious ant larvae
being swept away.
The ants have
a cunning strategy.
Every tide, these ants
combine their forces
and move the entire nest,
larvae and all,
into bell-shaped chambers
they've built
which trap the air,
keeping them safely
above the waterline.
Here they'll remain
for several hours
until the tide retreats.
So cooperation between
arthropods of the same species
offers great advantages.
But we must look elsewhere
for the ultimate key
to the success
of the arthropods.
We must examine the idea
that diversity stems
not only from cooperation
but also exploitation.
A female bolas spider.
She's hunting for food
and she's got
a pretty unique way of doing it.
She spins a single thread
of silk,
thinner than a human hair,
with a sticky globule
on the end.
And from special glands
on her abdomen,
she produces a pheromone
to attract her prey.
She waits.
An approaching moth,
but she hasn't quite
got her eye in.
She doesn't miss twice.
So arthropods affect
their own diversity
by providing a food source.
And necessity being
the mother of all invention,
they've evolved
some diverse and ingenious ways
of catching each other.
But the exploitative
relationships between them
don't end there.
The Mojave Desert
in California.
This is a female
blister beetle.
She lays her eggs
in the scorching sand
of the desert a few
centimeters below the surface--
the perfect temperature
for incubation.
When the larvae hatch,
they need to find food,
and fast.
En masse, they climb
the nearest stem of grass
and form a cluster.
They release a pheromone
identical to that produced
by a female digger bee,
and it isn't long
before they're noticed.
This is a male digger bee,
and he's come to mate,
but instead
of an amorous reception,
he's boarded by hundreds
of larvae.
Temporarily stunned,
he falls to the floor,
but quickly regains
his composure
and heads off in search
of another female.
While he's mating,
his stowaways jump ship.
The female then returns
to her burrow
where she's secreted pollen
for her un-hatched young.
The blister beetle's larvae
have reached safety
and a ready supply
of food,
and when the pollen
is finished,
they'll consume the young
of the digger bee.
So we know that predation
and exploitation
lead to diversity.
But there's one final factor
that affects the success
of the arthropods,
one final vital key
that unlocks
a greater understanding
of their world,
and without which
the array of life we see today
would not be present,
and it's diversity itself.
Diversity breeds diversity.
Arthropods are part
of a constant arms race
to outmaneuver
and exploit each other,
a process called
co-evolution.
To see co-evolution at work,
we must head to a meadow
in the Swiss Alps.
This is a female
Alcon blue butterfly.
She lays her eggs
on the gentian plant,
and when they've hatched
into caterpillars
and eaten their fill,
they drop onto the ground.
Surrounded by foraging ants,
you'd think they'd be
at risk,
but the ants
dutifully collect them
and transport them back
to their nest
where they're cleaned
and fed.
The Alcon blue caterpillars
have bewitched the ants.
They emit chemicals
that convince the ants
they're one
of their own larvae,
even producing noises
similar to those made
by the queen ant
to ensure the royal treatment.
They've checked in
to a 5-star ant hotel.
But the ingenuity
of this butterfly species
presents an opportunity
to any other species
canny enough
to exploit it.
This is a ichneumon wasp.
Out of hundreds of ants' nests,
she's able to detect the one
that contains
an Alcon butterfly caterpillar.
The ants' response
to any invader is to attack,
but she releases a pheromone
that deranges the ants.
They begin to attack
each other.
And this buys her
the time she needs.
The wasp makes a beeline
for the butterfly larvae
where she will lay her eggs.
Job complete,
she leaves the nest.
The ants' nest,
released from the wasps spell,
returns to normal.
The caterpillars remain
in the nest
until the following summer
when they transform into a pupa,
and after about a month,
the adult butterflies
emerge.
But not every pupa contains
an Alcon blue adult.
A young ichneumon wasp.
The exploiter
has become the exploited.
Diversity has presented
opportunity.
The wasp has evolved
to exploit the butterfly,
who exploits the ants.
Their lives are
intricately linked.
They have co-evolved.
And this is the final,
vital key to the abundance
and diversity
of the arthropods--
the process of co-evolution.
All over the world,
the opportunities
presented by other arthropods
are creating the pressure
to innovate and evolve.
No doubt this diversity
wouldn't exist
if it weren't for that
winning body plan, small size,
ability to reproduce,
work cooperatively,
and finally predate
and exploit each other.
But it's this snowballing
effect of diversity itself
that raises arthropods
onto a whole new level.
The arthropods have lived,
survived,
and thrived on earth
for 400 million years...
[thunderclap]
...through extreme
climate change,
volcanic events,
ice ages,
and the extinction
of the dinosaurs.
In fact, arthropods
have survived and thrived
when 99.9% of all species
that ever lived
have become extinct.
They are the most successful
and diverse group of animals
to have ever lived.
♪